What was the first video game that
really hooked you?
>> I believe it was an Odyssey 500,
>> the electronic game of the future.
Odyssey easily attaches to any brand TV.
>> This was a flat panel [music]
with three dials on each side. And if I
recall correctly, it had three or four
games, something very primitive. But
what shocked me was that I was
controlling something on the TV. And you
know, TV was something you just sat
there and you watched. It was very
passive. Now games are more advanced
than ever. I mean, they're giant
productions. You know, we're trying to
show people that [music] gaming is
really the best form of entertainment
for many.
This week on Bold Names, we have Eric
Lumpel. He is senior vice president of
business and product at Sony Interactive
Entertainment. Now, Sony owns
PlayStation, which means Eric spends a
lot of time thinking about video games,
that booming industry. And because video
games and entertainment are increasingly
synonymous, even if you're not a gamer,
so much of what we all consume every day
is affected by video games.
Eric Limpel, welcome to Bold Names. Can
you characterize for me the scale of the
global gaming industry?
>> Well, certainly. And first off, thanks
for having me. I'm really, really happy
to be here talking with both of you. you
the gaming industry is bigger than ever.
If you look specifically at PlayStation,
you know, we're currently the market
leader. We're the biggest part of Sony
actually. So, so the PlayStation
business, the games and network
services.
>> So, you're bigger than movies and music
in Sony.
>> Exactly.
>> And gaming as a whole is bigger than
movies and music.
>> Exactly.
>> Entirely.
>> Exactly. The revenue coming in from
gaming is bigger than any other form of
entertainment right now. And I think
most people wouldn't believe it. They
wouldn't realize it. But but gaming is
massive mainstream entertainment and
there are more people gaming than ever
before.
>> I mean it's crazy more than $200 billion
last year according to Bane and Co. And
I'm curious what's driving that? Why are
people
rushing to this medium? Because I think
for some to Mims' point, they don't
realize that this has become such a huge
way to entertain yourself.
>> Well, I think a lot of people have
discovered gaming in various forms over
the years. You know, if you go back many
years and and some of my early days of
gaming, you had to really want to play
games to play games. You had to go out
and actively buy some type of gaming
system, bring it home, buy games for
that system,
>> or you had to sneak out to the arcade
like I did as a kid.
>> Exactly. Or go out to the arcade with a
lot of quarters at the time, which which
I did as well. And uh you know, so that
was kind of you're actively going out to
seek gaming as a form of entertainment.
But what happened over the years was
that gaming became more accessible.
Everybody's carrying a smartphone in
their pocket. They can download games.
Many are free to play. They can try
different types of games. And I think a
lot of people realized, you know, I I
like this. And I also think just games
have gotten a lot better. If we think
back to the early days of gaming, there
were great games, but they weren't
anywhere near as sophisticated or as
realistic as the games we have today.
And so, there are big names attached to
games now. There are big personalities
attached to games. So, there's a lot of
different things that will draw people
into gaming. Yeah, one of the hot ones
is Grand Theft Auto 5, which just has
made a ton of money, more money than the
highest grossing film of all time,
Avatar, right? I mean, these are huge,
huge uh productions. Uh in Grand Theft
Auto 6, supposed to be out, now it's
being delayed. I know a lot of people
are super excited about that for next
year. Now, when we look at PlayStation,
you're really the big dog for the
consoles, the video game machines,
right? you have about almost 50% of the
console market uh according to to
researchers out there. PlayStation
launched more than 30 years ago. What's
keeping PlayStation so relevant,
especially in an era where it's so easy
to get onto the internet, so easy to
play games with your iPhone or your
Pixel or whatever you want out in the
world?
>> Well, I think it goes back to the the
origin of PlayStation. So when we
entered the market in you know 1994 in
Japan 1995 in the rest of the world we
were the underdog you know we were
coming into a space that already had big
players in it.
>> Nintendo
>> exactly Nintendo Sega remember Sega was
a big console maker and then here here
comes Sony with a a brand new project
>> and uh and something different and
others have tried you know there there
were other Japanese electronic companies
that tried to enter the space. So, so
Sony comes in as the underdog and looks
to do things really different and and
really just changing the way they
interact with the publishers who were
working with the other console
manufacturers, but also changing the
game for the consumer and and that's
something that we've kept with us our
entire history. You know, we we still
have a very big challenger spirit. So we
see it, you know, we see our place in
the industry now as as the company that
has to lead the industry forward through
technology and creativity.
>> So much growth in the industry. It makes
me wonder how business the business
model of gaming has changed over the
years, right? It's a long way from going
to the arcade and putting your quarter
in. Uh now that you can buy the game,
but there's also freeto play where the
companies make their money uh inside the
game, whether with loot boxes or what we
call microtransactions.
uh maybe such as in Fortnite, you get a
special outfit or something like that,
maybe you know that makes you look
cooler, you know, how do you think about
kind of the the ways to figure out how
to make more money or how to generate
new kinds of money uh with inside the
gaming environment and also making sure
you keep your cut of it.
>> So for us, you know, we we lead with a
great experience, we lead with
creativity and then fortunately that the
business model follows. And I think
there are many ways to monetize. You
know, right now we sell individual
games. We've got free-to-play games with
add-ons. And, you know, the add-ons
aren't required. Someone can have an
incredible time in Fortnite, you know,
without buying some of the cosmetic
items, but fortunately, a lot of people
do, and they they enjoy buying that
stuff. Um, but then, you know, beyond
that, we have add-ons to games. You
know, we can build upon a game that's
already released and add to it and add
new chapters, add new levels, add new
characters. So, so there's a number of
ways to do that. Um, but on the whole,
you know, the value the consumer gets
from the games themselves is is bigger
than ever. I mean, people can play these
games longer than they ever have before,
just given the sheer size of them. And
then, you know, something else we do
very well is a membership service. We've
got something called PlayStation Plus.
It's been around for 15 years, and it's
a way for consumers to get more out of
their gaming experience. Um, you know,
they can access a library of games and
other features to enhance the
experience. And you know we found that
consumers have really adopted this
product and they really enjoy the
experience they get from it. Now a lot
of technologies I mean they tend to
follow the same pattern right there's
there's this kind of explosive radiation
of innovation new forms people perfect
those forms right arguably gaming
consoles and online gaming aren't ch
haven't changed that much recently like
PlayStation 5 it's been around a few
years it's kind of the perfection of the
form arguably but we are at a moment
where there's going to be big change
right and some of that is driven by AI
by generative AI it's changing
notably how games are made, but it also
seems like it has huge potential to
change what games look like. I'm really
curious
uh how you're thinking about generative
AI, how it might transform the gaming
experience that Sony delivers in the
future.
So, one thing we've been really good at
is is looking at all the technology out
there at any given moment and seeing
what future technologies are available
to create a great experience. And, you
know, if you think about the consoles
over the years, they've evolved
significantly. You know, we we went from
standard definition to high definition
to now 4K. We've changed our interface.
You we had this DualShock controller
which, you know, would vibrate at
certain points of the game to kind of
make you feel like you're closer to the
game. And then with PS5, we introduce
something called the Dual Sense, which
um really has haptic feedback. So, so as
we look forward, it's it doesn't change,
you know, we're going to look at the
latest technology, including AI, to see
how we can use that to enhance our
developers ability to make great games.
It it's really about how can we get
there faster? How can we do something
even bigger with gaming based on
>> I'm looking forward to smell mode or
something like that,
>> you know? It's I I've seen it proposed
um many years ago, but I I have seen it
proposed. So,
>> I'm just throwing this out there. Can
you imagine being in Fortnite? How much
money you that they could make in Fort
Mode for the kids, right? I mean, that
just seems like you can keep that idea.
I've given away these million dollar
ideas. Give it to Tim Sweeney over at
Epic Games.
>> There there's a patent there somewhere,
Tim, and I think you just gave it away.
But, um yeah, [laughter]
>> but but seriously, but in the
applications in AI, what's exciting you
right now when you look at AI? I mean,
you know, we're outside of the industry.
Are you seeing anything in AI that
you're you're saying, "Oh, this is going
to be just the next thing."
>> I haven't seen anything that's
gamechanging yet, but I'm I'm sure it
will come. And uh and I'm sure, you
know, there will be great use of this
again to enhance the creativity, to
enhance the efficiency, to really just
see how we can make things even better.
>> Maybe you haven't seen something
gamechanging yet, but I mean, I'm seeing
interesting experiments all the time.
people saying, "Oh, I'm going to use AI
to like interpolate between these key
frames, and this is going to speed up
generating these sprites." Are these
three threedimensional objects? I mean,
surely there's something going on there
where you're finding that it can maybe
at least marginally enhance the
productivity of your developers, your
designers.
>> Definitely. Definitely. It's absolutely
enhancing the productivity. I I was more
thinking of the consumer. You know, what
is the consumer going to see that's
different? you know, this might help
them get there faster, get there more
efficiently, but I I'm I'm thinking
there's going to be technology that's
going to make the games even better in
time, and our developers can lean in on
that technology and use it in ways that
we we probably don't fully understand
yet.
>> One of the promises that AI holds um out
there, at least in Silicon Valley, among
a lot of the startups or even the
established players, is they they see it
as a potential to disrupt the platforms,
the gatekeepers to these worlds. And in
a lot of ways, PlayStation is a
platform. It is a gatekeeper into a
video game world. There's hope among
some that I think Mark Zuckerberg over
at Meta Platforms. He's hoping that his
AI smart glasses, for example, will be a
new gateway into the digital world that
will displace this product, the the
iPhone, right? And the iPhone has become
a huge video game machine for a lot of
people, too. I'm curious when you think
about how PlayStation the hardware
uh evolves for this future of AI, are
you concerned about its place in the
living room uh as the gateway to the
video game world? Is there is there
disruption that could come?
>> It's quite possible disruption will
come, but what's great about the way we
think about things is that we're not
locked to any specific direction. we are
always going to see what's out there,
continue to see where the consumer is
going or wants to go or we think they
should go and develop around that. So,
um you know, we love all of the
competition and the creativity coming
out because it just inspires us to think
about things differently and push
harder. And I I think that's good for
everybody.
>> One of the other things that I think
about when I just look at the industry
is you got these great games, people are
excited about them. They're but they're
it's more than just games, right? Uh, I
mean it gets this fundamental issue of
who we are as a species. Even I think
even non-humans play games and my
puppy's always playing games. I I wonder
I wonder if AI if there's a threat that
AI developed games almost feel soulless,
right? It's when you look at such hits
like Grand Theft Auto, would there be a
a Grand Theft Auto without the humans
involved? Could a computer could a robot
do that? I
>> I I think we're going to need people to
tell these great stories. And you know,
if you look at a lot of the games that
have been successful on PlayStation, it
really is about human stories. And you
know, in some cases, it may be aliens,
but but still some form of being that is
going through something in their world.
That's a challenge. So, um, I'm I'm
pretty confident we're going to need
people involved in in making these
things because, you know, that's where
the stories are. That's where the
emotion is, and and that's what gaming
is doing now more than ever. It's really
reaching people on a a deeper emotional
level.
>> So, as gaming reaches us on a deeper
emotional level, as it becomes a better
medium for storytelling, we have seen a
lot more crossover between games and
Hollywood than ever before. I mean, this
is a thing that like, you know,
supposedly was going to happen 20 years
ago, didn't really take, but now you
have the Minecraft movie. It was a
monster hit. The Last of Us. You got any
advice on the best way west?
>> Yeah, go east.
>> Where do you think this is going? Are we
just going to see more and more
crossover? Is it going to be more
birectional?
>> I I think it's uh I think it's it's
quite possible. I I think what's
happened over the past few years, as you
as you've really summed up well, I is
that people are taking the IP very
seriously when they transition it from a
game to another form of media. And that
was very important to us. And you know,
you mentioned The Last of Us. So, so if
we take that for a moment, I I've got to
tell you, I I can't tell you the number
of people that have come up to me and
you have talked about it and family,
friends, or whoever, they didn't know
that was a game. And and then when I
tell them it was a game, they say,
"Well, well, how was that a game?" And
if you if you know the game and you if
you play the game, if you look at the
first season, the first season is the
first game.
>> And they can't believe it. And these are
people who haven't really engaged with
gaming in a while, but they don't
realize, you know, gaming has evolved
and we're telling these deep stories and
and I think that's what's great. So,
what's important here is that, you know,
it's been tried many times over the
years, as you said, but for us, when
we're going to take this IP and bring it
outside of gaming to another place, you
know, we recognize that we need to work
with teams and people who are talented
in that medium. And so we want to make
sure we're working with the best to
transition from gaming to the other
medium. So I think we'll see a lot more
of this given the success as of late,
you know, with us and a lot of the other
IP holders.
>> You know, we've been talking about
expansion of your industry, how big it
is. Um, you know, but there's some
consolidation and contraction,
significant. Tim, I think you have the
numbers on this. Yeah, I mean you look
at Microsoft acquired Activision
Blizzard for $75 billion a few years ago
and then this year earlier this year
Electronics Arts uh near $50 billion to
go private with some help Saudi Arabian
Saudi Arabia's public investment fund
among others. What's going on there?
What's driving this? I
>> I think there's more interest in the
category than ever before. You know,
when we talk about annual revenue of
$200 billion, a lot of people are
interested and there's a lot of great
talent that in many cases benefits from
the backing of outside parties, you
know, to continue to do what they do and
deliver a bigger experience. So, I I
think this is a trend that we've seen
over the past few years. Um, it it will
probably continue. Um, you know, there
there actually aren't that many big
publishers left to acquire when you look
across the board. maybe a few at this
point, but I think there's just more
interest in the category than ever
before.
>> I got to say though, there has been
layoffs at major studios, storied
studios, there have been big projects
canceled. What is going on there? Is
that because of this consolidation or is
are there too many games? Are they too
hard to develop? I
>> I think it's similar to any other
business. You know, it depends on how
businesses are run and lots of people
have different plans. There are plans to
expand. sometimes you might expand too
quickly, but I don't think it's any
anything specific to our industry. I
think it's just more noticeable um just
because there's so much interest in the
category.
>> I mean, the economics can be challenging
at times as well, right? Um those big
blockbuster games can be very expensive
to make, take a lot of people to do. Um,
as we think about what's next though, I
wonder about virtual reality, augmented
reality, uh, and where you see that. I
think if we were to go back in time,
there was a lot of hope that VR was
going to be the dominant thing.
>> Like the the movie Lawnmower Man was
supposed to be real by now. We were all
going to be in VR headsets. Didn't
happen. But something's coming. What are
you excited about? Well, you know,
looking looking back, we've had two VR
products, PlayStation VR and then
PlayStation VR 2 that consumers loved
and uh you know, they worked really
really well. They provided a different
experience, but for us, we never thought
that was the direction going forward.
So, you know, going forward, I'm I'm
really excited about how technology is
going to further creativity. I I think
you know we've seen over the past few
years gaming getting more and more
interesting and developers really
leaning on the technology to tell the
stories that in some cases they've
always wanted to tell but didn't have
the ability to tell due to technical
limitations. I I think that's all
changed.
>> Well, can you be a little more specific?
What new technologies are you excited
about?
>> Well, we we just announced a partnership
with AMD where we have our system
architect Mark Cerny. designed the the
architecture for PlayStation 5,
PlayStation 4. We're working with AMD
now and you know who also is very
wellversed in the space um to really see
where we can push the industry going
forward. And with Mark involved, you
know, this will most certainly be
something that will power any type of
PlayStation experience going forward,
but it will also be open to other AMD
customers. So, um you know, we're really
excited about what's going to come out
of that. I couldn't say more at this
time, but we've announced that recently
and it's it's down a path. So,
>> but it's a custom or customized chip.
>> Yes.
>> Right. Like Apple has done to great
effect.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> I mean, it's it's interesting. You know,
we talked about AI, we talked a little
bit about VR. Um there is a point of
view or a thought among some in the
industry and some in tech that we are
coming towards this kind of convergence
where AI generated videos um are going
to be involved with the kind of 3D
gaming the gaming engines are going to
kind of be involved in the AI extended
reality is going to be there. I even
think, you know, you look at Tim
Sweeney, who we mentioned, the CEO of
Epic Games. He was on X the other day
engaging in this kind of conversation.
And I'll quote from him. Everyone
overestimates what will happen in the
next three months and wildly
underestimates what will happen in the
next three years. So, you're a
PlayStation guy. How do you navigate
that?
>> Yeah, I I I think that's a great quote.
I hadn't heard that until now and it
makes a lot of sense. And you know we
are you know absolutely focused on the
business perspective for the next few
months but we as a company are
absolutely looking out three years and
it's very complicated. You know there's
a lot that goes into developing the
future and it takes a lot of time and
it's not easy to pivot. But you know we
are going to lean in on everything we've
learned over the last 30 years which has
really served us well to sort of figure
out where we think that future is going
and in many cases define that future.
We've talked about the immersiveness of
games, but of course what has brought so
many people into gaming is, as you
described to us, accessibility. The fact
that we have it on our phones and of
course, you know, when I'm on the train,
I look at what people are playing. It is
it's like a match three game is
ubiquitous. It's Tetris. It's some
variant. It's something that's easy on
mobile.
We still like these games, right?
They're they're kind of eternal. tap
into something almost genetic about us.
And you know, I'm I'm curious, you know,
even as you make these games more
sophisticated,
more uh, you know, immersive,
do you feel like that's changing the
ingredients of what make a great game or
are the fundamentals still the same?
>> I think you hit on it. And, you know,
we're we're rooted in play, people's
desire to play, because play brings us
joy. It brings us closer to people. It's
in our name. It's half of our name. So,
um, so I I think that's what we're
always going to focus on. You know, the
technology will change. The way people
interact with games will change, but
we're always going to focus on play. You
know, the core need for people to play.
And that's really what we're all about
today and what we'll be about in 30
years from now.
>> Eric, thank you very much for your time
with us today.
>> Thank you. No, it was great being here.
Really enjoyed speaking with you both.
>> [music]